---
layout: post
title: New Post
excerpt: "Hello world.."
modified: 2013-05-31
tags: [personal]
comments: true
image:
  feature: mcginty_first_landing_banner.jpg 
  credit: Tessa Pierce
  #creditlink: http://wegraphics.net/downloads/free-ultimate-blurred-background- pack/
---

I'm trying a new medium to tell you about my life, mainly for the purpose of talking about BIKE AND BUILD - my summer cycling trip from Boston to Santa Barbara to raise money and awareness for affordable housing.

 
  
  I just moved to monterey and into my old apartment in Belden, the Hopkins Marine Station student housing. This quarter has been wonderful so far (although I miss my BIZZLE buddies)! Annie (my roommate/partner in crime) and I are sharing the apartment, which means we have two (actually, three...silly housing put a 5th bed in here!) extra beds and lots of space. It's been unseasonally warm and sunny lately and I absolutely adore it. My favorite part of monterey is the comforting smell of the cold salty air, especially when it comes
  with a glimpse of gray ocean. Sadly, I acclimate to the smell too quickly and hardly notice it during everyday life. Its best when I've been away, kind of like good memories when you go home or see an old friend. 
   
   But to the point of this update: my Annie (blog link tba) and I are training to cycle across the country this summer with an organization known as Bike and Build (www.bikeandbuild.org). This program teams up with housing groups like Habitat for Humanity and Rebuilding together to raise money and awareness for affordable housing. My trip rides from Boston to Santa Barbara- almost 4,000 miles - and stops about every week to spend a full day building on a housing project. We give presentations on affordable
   housing along the way and donate our money (each rider must raise a minimum of $4,000 to participate) to groups providing housing to families in need. Over the next 5 months or so, I'll be cycling, building, and fundraising like crazy to prepare for the trip. It sounds daunting, but I hope you'll cheer me on as I take on this challenge!
    
    
I'd love to hear what you're up to!
     
      
Tess

