---
layout: post
title: Mud Everywhere! Geologists Everywhere! Geologists covered in mud!
---

[photo of ben covered in mud]

A main goal of this cruise is to collect sediment from the hypoxic (low oxygen) Santa Barbara Basin, as well as from an oxygenated (high oxygen) site closer to the coast. To do this, you lower a hollow coring device (with a heavy weight on top) down to the bottom where it will cut into the sediment. Then a gate at the bottom of the coring device will shut, trapping the sediment core and allowing you to pull the corer and its sediment up to the surface.

I’ll let you in on a little secret: Deep-sea sediment cores? They’re pretty. Look at this core that was collected using a Kasten corer. At the top, there is a living biological layer. in this one, since there is little oxygen, the surface of the sediments is covered with a film of bacteria known as a ‘bacterial mat.’ Below that, you can see layers (called laminations) that are different colors and thicknesses. These layers are the accumulation of mud, silt, and biological matter that rains down from the surface. As I mentioned in the previous post, you can date these layers and use them to understand what the ocean was like during those times. This core probably goes back about 2,000 years, but today, the geologists also used a piston core that uses a mechanism to force a 20-meter long corer into the sediments. The core represents about10,000 years of sediment build up! And then the real work starts: processing and preserving the sample for later use.

[photo of the layered sediment core]

We have been very lucky with weather – it’s been very calm, sunny during the days, and almost a full moon at night to supplement the bright ship lights. Yesterday, I was needed on night watch, and so spent the entire 24 hours working. At night, we have a very packed deployment schedule, and also try to jig for squid when the ship is stopped at a station. Needless to say, I collapsed into bed at 5 in the morning for a few hours sleep.

Every day, four people on the ship write a blog entry, and each weekday, the
educators will be making a video centered on the Daily Learning Themes for their students. Check it out here: calechoes.wordpress.com/video. You can also follow our twitter feed for all things Cal Echoes: twitter.com/calechoes

